Context.
Context is a, I teach this intentionally pretty late
in the course, or in terms of like late
of the fundamentals of React.
It's a powerful tool,
and I see new React developers get tempted
to use it all over the place
because it simplifies the writing part of React,
and I will say it greatly complicates
the maintenance part of React.
This is another way of me saying, me begging you,
as your perhaps future coworkers,
you'd be very sparing with your use of context.
Use it, you know, with great power
comes great responsibility.
You know, that's, I think I'm the first person
to ever say that.
No, it's just, props come from parent to child,
parent to child, and it becomes very explicit,
the data flow of your app.
Context is like being able to dump data into a portal,
and then somewhere else being able to receive data
out of the portal.
And so if you have, you know, five components
that are passing data from parent to child,
parent to child, it can get a little annoying.
That problem's called the prop drilling problem.
It's tempting to use context there, right?
I'm gonna say, unless you're using that context
in multiple places, that state in multiple different places,
just deal with the prop drilling.
I know it's annoying, but it is helpful.
But there are some things that are legitimately
what I would call app level state.
A really good example of this would be like a user, right?
So if someone logs into your website,
that doesn't just affect one part of your website,
it affects everything in your website, right?
You're showing the user their information,
their checkout information, their address, right?
And that's all pulling from the same piece
of user information.
So you could have like app.jsx have you state user, right?
And then pass that into everything.
That doesn't seem like a good idea to me, right?
I think it's better to say like, hey,
we have this app level state that is the user,
and then anyone can pull out of the context who the user is.
Does that make sense?
So you're looking for what I call app level state
as opposed to like view level state or like localized state.
That's where context is useful.
Theme is another one that will sometimes come up, right?
If someone switches their theme,
that affects not just one piece of your code,
it affects a lot of the pieces of your code.
So you might use theme as another piece of context.
A lot of time libraries, so like react router
or 10 stack router, which we're gonna look at here
in a little bit, those will use context quite a bit.
It's also made for those things,
and you don't have to care about those things
because that's their problem, not yours.
So in our app here, we have a header,
and I wanna put like a little like indicator there
of what's in your cart.
And then the other thing that you can say about cart
being as a function of context is like,
if someone navigates away from this order page,
so let's say there was an about page or a contact page,
which we'll build here in just a second.
If they navigate it to the contact page
and then they navigated back to the order page,
what would happen to the cart?
Disappear, right?
Why?
If this gets unmounted, all of its state goes away, right?
It doesn't get saved if it gets removed from the DOM, right?
So if I come over here to app.jsx,
you know what, we can literally do this.
We're gonna add a bunch of stuff right here.
I'm just gonna remove this, okay?
So I just removed it from the DOM,
which would be the same thing from unrendering it, right?
And then I'm gonna add it back.
Notice that the cart is empty again, right?
Because it got totally thrown away.
It would be the same thing if you routed
to a different page and came back.
Now again, we are in the business of making pizza money,
right?
So we wanna keep that cart full, right?
Always be keeping cart fulls.
That's what they say, right?
I think so.
So we wanna preserve the cart between page loads.
That's what I'm getting at.
So we're gonna use context to do that.
Now, really what you could do,
which would be probably a much simpler model of doing this,
is you would just say, use state cart right there, right?
And just pass it into all of them.
But we wanna learn about context.
I'm gonna show you how to do it with context.
So first thing, let's build the header
that's going to read from the cart, okay?
So new page, we're gonna make it called header.jsx.
We're gonna say export default function header, okay?
Return, and we're gonna put a nav
because we all like semantic markup.
Remember when that used to be like a really big thing
and people would get all bent out of shape
about semantic markup?
Don't use divs, always use navs.
What happened to those arguments?
I feel like we should argue more about that.
Padre Gino's Pizza, cool.
And then we're gonna say div class name equals nav-cart.
And then I'm gonna put an emoji in here of a cart.
Span class name equals nav-cart-number.
Put any number you want in here.
I'm just gonna put five.
And cool, that'll be enough for now for our header.
Let's put that into app.jsx.
I think we can just replace.
So we're gonna import header from header.
And I think we can just replace this.
Yep, header.
You'll see that this is kind of turning out
to be just a composition of a lot of other functions
that we've made or a lot of other components.
It's kind of what React is for the most part.
It's just composing components into other components.
All right, so now we got this like a little fun cart thing
up there, right?
Obviously five is fake, right?
This isn't actually reading from the real cart.
So how would we do that?
Well, think about this for a second now.
How would you do that right now,
not having learned about context yet?
How would you do it?
There's no cart in here, right?
So you would have to do use state here
and you'd have to say cart equals cart.
And you would have to say cart equals cart here.
But then we would have to actually pass in set cart here,
because then you'd end up with a bunch
of kind of fallout effects of that.
Well, nobody wants to do that, right?
So let's go ahead and do it a different way.
Let's use context.
So I've seen people do this with a bunch
of different patterns.
I saw one recently that I kind of liked,
so I'm gonna teach that one today.
They just created a file called contexts.jsx
and they throw all of their context into one context file.
Thought that was kind of cool,
because it's never very much.
My context files used to be like literally like one line
and then I would export it and it was just very shortened
and it's gonna shorten sweep and more shortened dumb.
Sure, we're gonna say create context,
which is gonna come from React.
Okay, and then we're gonna export const.
So this one you actually do wanna do a name.
If you're gonna do this pattern
where you have multiple different contexts
coming from one file,
it's important that you would do named exports, right?
Import export const cart context equals create context.
You can leave it like this if you want to
and just call it good there.
For the sake of maybe your future TypeScript self
and or future testing self,
it is useful with context to give it like,
this is the shape of what is going to be held
inside of this context.
So we're gonna hold a hook in here, right?
That's what we're gonna do
because we're gonna hold a state
that's both mutable and readable.
So what is the return type for a hook?
It's an array
and what is cart?
An array
and then what is this?
Some function.
Right?
That's the type, that's what a hook looks like, right?
So I'm literally just gonna put that right here.
So I show that to you because I know this looks obtuse
and weird, but that's why you're doing it.
Why this is nice.
As soon as you pop this into TypeScript,
TypeScript will be like, oh, okay, I got this.
It's an array with this and this
and it's just gonna check it and get it right away.
So it's just a good habit to get into.
And even though we're not using TypeScript
anywhere in this project, VS Code does an okay job.
It's just a good habit to get into.
And even though we're not using TypeScript
anywhere in this project, VS Code does an okay job
of observing types in here.
Okay.
So let's go set up our context.
Go to app.jsx.
We're going to import cart context from contexts
and the first thing we're gonna do
is we're gonna wrap our app in this thing called
cart context dot provider.
Usually strict mode is always gonna be the outermost thing.
The order inside of it really
usually doesn't make a difference.
So what is cart context provider doing for us?
Well, the first thing is that
that can be kind of strange with React.
You can have components that
don't actually render real markup.
All they do is they act as kind of a pass-through,
but they augment the ability
of the components inside of them.
And that's what this provider is doing.
It's now making whatever value
that we're gonna pass into it,
which we'll do momentarily, we have not done yet.
And it's gonna make that available everywhere inside of it.
Now what's kind of cool about this
is we're wrapping our whole app in it,
but we could do something like this
where now only pizza of the day has access to this context.
Kind of cool, right?
We could even have two different cart context providers
and have each one of them wrapped in it.
That seems like a weird idea,
and I'm not super into that one, but you could do it.
You can even have multiple cart contexts
kind of layer out from each other.
And what it's gonna do is
it's gonna find the nearest one, right?
So it's gonna find the one that's closest to it.
So if I had this and then this,
this is totally, I think it's value, yeah, okay.
So if I tried to access the context from pizza of the day,
what value would it get back?
One.
Now again, you might be thinking like, why would I do this?
And I'm also asking you, why would you do that?
I don't know why you would do that, but it is possible.
And it's why they had this kind of weird API.
Okay, so going back to where we were,
we're gonna say cart context dot provider.
A small footnote here, they're making it so in React 19,
you can just say cart context like that
and leave off the provider.
It's kind of nice.
So if you're watching this with React 19,
just go ahead and drop the dot provider.
Now we wanna hook that we wanna pass into the context.
So what we can do is we can say const cart hook equals,
notice we're not destructuring, use state like that.
And then the value here equals cart hook.
Okay.
Remember, normally you would say cart, set cart
and use that kind of destructuring here.
Here we're passing the whole thing in.
Does that mean that there's a setter
that's also been assigned within the cart hook object?
You got it.
So now we can call that within order
because we need to, right?
We have to be able to set that hook from inside order
or else this whole kind of thing falls apart.
Now, you might be thinking to yourself like,
well, does that mean you can set that hook anywhere?
And yes, you can and yes, it is a foot gun,
which is why I'm just like kind of
trying to steer you away from context as much as possible.
But there you go.